FXUS63 KAPX 042313
AFDAPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Gaylord MI
713 PM EDT Tue Apr 4 2023

.NEAR TERM...(Through Tonight)
Issued at 348 PM EDT Tue Apr 4 2023

...Icy mix north and heavy rain elsewhere...

High Impact Weather Potential...Snow/sleet/freezing rain mix
northern areas, especially eastern upper MI. Heavy rain much of
northern lower MI. 

991mb low pressure is in eastern KS. A nearly stationary front
extends e and ene from the low across central IL/IN and northern
OH. An initial push of showers and embedded TSRA has reached MBL,
though it is tending to weaken/diminish in coverage. But this is
just the beginning, as increasing warm/moist advection aloft
continues north of the front to our south. PWAT values rise to
about 1.25", well above normal for early April, along with MuCape
values of circa 1k j/kg. This is riding southerly 1km winds of
50-55kt by overnight.

We will see a smattering of convection, mainly in western
sections, thru about 01-02Z. As southerly flow increase, pops ramp
up thru the rest of the evening, and into the overnight.
Widespread liquid precip amounts of 0.5-1.5" are expected across
the area, with the highest amounts in northern lower MI, closer to
the front to our south. 

Early April is having an impact on expected p-type tonight. The
sun was able to thin out the lower clouds, especially over
northern sections. This has boosted temps and wet-bulb temps in 
this area. As a consequence, the surface temp curve is a bit 
warmer across most of northern MI. Southern sections remain just
liquid. For APN-GLR, just a very brief window of ZR/PL mixing in
is expected, before we turn over to rain. PLN-SLH will do a
gradual snow to sleet to ZR to rain transition, with snow/sleet
accums of 1-2". The UP remains worst off; even with some surface
heating up there, dew points have lowered to around 20f. They are
still well established for a lengthy period of PL/ZR late evening
and overnight, after some initial snow. 1-3" of snow/sleet, and
about 0.30" of ice, are expected.

Rivers in the region are fairly high, and soils have above-average
moisture, after the rains of Fri-Sat. Localized 2-3" rains are
likely in northern lower MI, as cells train for a period north of
the stationary front. We aren't usually flood-prone around here,
but some areas that can have more problems are greater TC 
(urban), and the far se (where our soils are somewhat less sandy).
Per coord with WPC/GRR/DTX, a flood watch has been issued for 
M-72 and south (including Leelanau) tonight into Wed morning. 

We have plenty of shear and increasing MuCape values later
tonight, though TSRA will be firmly elevated. An isolated severe 
hail threat remains possible tonight, especially overnight. 

By dawn, temps will be near freezing in the St Marys Valley, while
in the lower 50s at MBL/Frankfort.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Wednesday through Friday)
Issued at 348 PM EDT Tue Apr 4 2023

Wednesday through Friday:

High Impact Weather Potential: Severe thunderstorm threat with 
damaging wind, hail, tornadoes, and heavy rain all possible. Heavy 
rain may cause ponding of water over roadways and low lying areas. 
Minor flooding of local streams and rivers also possible. Strong 
winds Thursday.

Short term forecast period begins with a deepening area of low 
pressure over western Wisconsin with the associated warm front 
extending through the Straits area and cold front eastern Wisconsin 
and extending as far south as Brownsville, Texas. While in the warm 
sector of this system there will be a risk of heavy rainfall and 
strong winds with embedded thunderstorms. Any elevated thunderstorms 
or stronger showers have the potential to bring down 45-50kt winds 
to the surface as they reside on a southwesterly low-level jet at 
850mb. These storms will have the means to sustain themselves with 
200-500 J/kg MUCAPE, SRH around 150 m^2/s^2, and 0-6km bulk shear 
near 60kt. Forecast sounding PWATs are in excess of 1.00" throughout 
the day. The severe threat really kicks in between 15-18Z when CINH 
diminishes and MLCAPE nears 1000 J/kg and MUCAPE is around 1500 
J/kg, SRH around 200 m^2/s^2, 0-6km bulk shear still around 60kt, 
and sfc-3km lapse rates around 6C/km and 7C/km lapse rates above 
3km, just ahead and along the cold front. 15-21Z will be the most 
likely timeframe for severe thunderstorms...mainly south of the M-68 
corridor of northern lower Michigan. SPC still has an enhanced risk 
over much of northern lower Michigan. These storm parameters will 
include the risk of tornadoes (10% SPC area highlighted) as well as 
the damaging wind and hail potential as right curving hodographs 
also suggest. The aforementioned cold front will exit the area 
Wednesday evening with winds veering to south-southwesterly and 
intensifying, with gusts of 40-50mph possible early Thursday morning 
and last throughout the afternoon hours before diminishing in 
intensity during the evening hours Thursday. High pressure and drier 
air centered over the central CONUS will build into northern 
Michigan late Wednesday night into Thursday morning providing mostly 
precipitation-free weather, with the exception of some wrap-around 
moisture producing some light snow showers over Chippewa County 
Thursday.

With heavy rainfall throughout Tuesday night along with snow melt 
there may be ponding of water on roadways and low-lying areas as 
well as minor flooding of localized streams and rivers with QPF 
amounts of 1.00" to 2.00" possible tonight across northern Michigan.

The south to southwesterly winds Wednesday will advect warmer 
temperatures for the day with afternoon highs reaching into the 
upper 50s to upper 60s, with the potential of some areas reaching 
the 70 degree mark over northern lower Michigan. Eastern upper will 
most likely remain north of the warm front, meaning highs will be 
much lower than northern lower...only reaching into the mid to upper 
40s. Thursday and Friday will be much cooler, with daytime highs 
only reaching into the upper 30s to mid 40s across all of northern 
Michigan behind the departing cold front mentioned above.

.LONG TERM...(Friday night through Tuesday)
Issued at 348 PM EDT Tue Apr 4 2023

High Impact Weather Potential: Minimal at this time.

High pressure over the Great Lakes region will dominate northern 
Michigan's weather through the long term period for the time being, 
with the exception of an inverted trough possibly producing some 
light rain showers Sunday into Monday. High temperatures will 
moderate throughout the long term period beginning in the mid 40s to 
low 50s Saturday, warming a bit each day, then reaching into the mid 
50s to upper 60s by Tuesday.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Wednesday evening)
Issued at 713 PM EDT Tue Apr 4 2023

Strong low pressure over the Central Plains will continue to 
become better organized as it lifts NE into the Western Great
Lakes region over the next 24 hours. Warm moist air surging
northward combined with strong dynamics and increasing instability
will lead to the development of widespread precip across the
entire Western Great Lakes region.

Precip will fall as mixed precip during the onset across Eastern 
Upper and far Northern Lower Michigan...and the switch over the 
all rain later this evening. Surface temps will be cold enough for
this rain to freeze across Eastern Upper Michigan tonight into 
Wednesday morning before temps warm enough by around midday for 
precip to switch to plain rain. Precip across far Northern Lower 
Michigan will switch to plain rain late tonight and will continue 
in this form thru Wednesday as WAA continues.

Thunderstorms are certainly possible throughout the entire 24 
hour forecast...with the best chance likely Wednesday morning thru
mid afternoon. Strong to severe storms are possible...especially
during this time frame.

LLWS will also develop at all TAF sites late tonight into 
Wednesday. Surface winds will remain from the E/SE at 20 to 30 kts
with gusts to 40 kts expected. Winds will begin to shift to the
W/SW around TVC and MBL during Wednesday afternoon as the
associated cold front arrives.

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 348 PM EDT Tue Apr 4 2023

Gusty east winds tonight, with gales on many waters. Winds veer s
and then w on Wednesday, increasing further late Wed into early
Thu behind a strong cold front. Gales and again expected, and a
few storm-gusts remain possible.

&&

.APX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...Winter Weather Advisory until 2 AM EDT Wednesday for MIZ016>018-
     022-023-098.
     Flood Watch through Wednesday morning for MIZ020-025>036-041-042.
     Ice Storm Warning until 10 AM EDT Wednesday for MIZ086>088-
     095>097.
LH...Gale Warning until 10 AM EDT Wednesday for LHZ345>348.
     Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Wednesday for LHZ349.
LM...Gale Warning until 8 AM EDT Wednesday for LMZ323-341-342-344.
     Small Craft Advisory until 5 PM EDT Wednesday for LMZ345-346.
LS...Gale Warning from 11 PM this evening to 5 PM EDT Wednesday for 
     LSZ321-322.
&&

$$

NEAR TERM...JZ
SHORT TERM...TJL
LONG TERM...TJL
AVIATION...MLR
MARINE...JZ
