FXUS63 KJKL 241530
AFDJKL

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Jackson KY
1130 AM EDT Mon Apr 24 2023

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1129 AM EDT MON APR 24 2023

Made a couple updates this morning so far. First was to load in
the latest observations to make sure the near-term portion of the
forecast was on track. Otherwise let everything ride until just
after 10am when the ongoing NPW dropped off. Resent the NPW to
take out last night/morning wording and continue on with the
upcoming hazards for tonight/Tuesday morning. Also redid the HWO
and Zones to update hazards wording, and to remove any morning fog
wording. All updates have been published and sent to NDFD/web.
Collaboration is going on with the neighbors to start upgrading
the freeze watch to a freeze warning - so will send out another
update when this is done. 

UPDATE Issued at 710 AM EDT MON APR 24 2023

Fog has continued to develop through early this morning, 
expanding more along the Kentucky, Cumberland, and also the 
Licking River basins. Have freshened up the forecast to account 
for this, as well as updated the diurnal temperature curve through
this morning, incorporating the latest trends in the observations. 
Updates have been sent. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Tuesday)
Issued at 511 AM EDT MON APR 24 2023

The latest upper level map features a persistent low spiraling
over the Minnesota/Ontario border, with several vorticity lobes 
gyring around the periphery of the center. Broad troughing still 
expands south through the northern Gulf Coastal region. Upstream, 
ridging is aligned from the Alberta/Saskatchewan border through 
the northern/central Rockies, with short wave energy moving in 
over the Pacific Northwest. At the surface, high pressure is 
situated from the middle Mississippi Valley through the Ohio 
Valley. Scattered to broken higher-based stratocu continues to 
remain on the northeastern fringe of our forecast area, associated
with a passing short wave trough. Temperatures have dipped below 
30 degrees in places generally near and west of I-75, where more 
sustained clearing has taken place overnight. Temperatures across 
the Bluegrass and east of I-75 are currently in the low to mid 
30s, with mid 30s more common in far eastern Kentucky, where 
clouds have hung on longer. The satellite fog channel also reveals
some fog within portions of the Cumberland and Kentucky River 
basins.

The models are in good agreement through the period, with the
upper level low to gyre its way east southeast, residing across
southeastern Ontario by late Tuesday. This will result in a
maintenance of cyclonic flow across the Great Lakes and Ohio
Valley through the period, with a gradual increase in 500 mb
heights. At the surface, high pressure will meander east, reaching 
the Upper Ohio River Basin and through the Mid-Atlantic region by
the end of the period. Dry and cool weather will continue across
eastern Kentucky, with another night of near or sub-freezing
temperatures and frost. 

Clouds should be a little less prevalent today, with drier low
level air in place, along with some 500 mb height recovery.
This will allow for slightly warmer highs compared to yesterday,
with mid 50s occurring north of I-64, to around 60 bordering
Tennessee. Mostly clear skies and calming winds tonight will allow
for another chilly night, with lows in the low to mid 30s west, 
with a few spots dipping to below 30 degrees. As such, have
hoisted another Frost Advisory. Further east, and in coordination
with surrounding offices, a Freeze Watch has been issued, with a 
good chance of a light to hard freeze in the deeper valleys by 
dawn Tuesday morning, as some of typically colder valleys see 
temperatures around 27 degrees. An increase in mid and high level 
clouds will occur from the west during the pre-dawn hours, and 
these should help keep temperatures in check in our west. These 
clouds will continue to stream in aloft on Tuesday, with the 
thicker cloud cover expected during the morning hours, and some 
thinning likely in the afternoon. Highs will modify to mainly the
lower 60s, with a few mid 60 degree readings, still below our 
normal highs in the lower 70s for this time of year. 

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday night through Sunday)
Issued at 513 AM EDT MON APR 24 2023

Key Messages:

1. Slightly below normal temperatures prevail through the long-term 
period.

2. Multiple disturbances will bring opportunities for rainfall 
each day, culminating with the passage of a strong cold front over
the upcoming weekend.

3. Well below normal temperatures are favored heading into the first 
few days of May. 

Analysis:

The 24/00z model suite 500H analysis beginning late Tuesday evening 
shows weakly cyclonic to quasi-zonal flow over the Commonwealth, 
courtesy an ~540 dam low over the Ottawa Valley. The upstream 
pattern is unsettled with a disturbance over the Southern Plains 
just ahead of an ~558 dam low/shortwave trough over the Upper 
Colorado River Basin. Another potent trough will be shearing away 
from an ~518 dam low near/over the Alaska Peninsula. At the surface, 
regional analysis shows a surface trough extending from weak low 
pressure in the Ottawa Valley southwestward into the Lower Ohio 
Valley. A wavering boundary is also found well to our south from the 
Georgia Coast, north of the Gulf Coast and then across Texas to a 
surface low pressure in the lee of the Southern Rockies, just ahead 
of the aforementioned ~558 dam low/shortwave trough. 

The leading disturbance will shift across the Southeast US Tuesday 
Night and Wednesday, spreading mid and high cloud cover across the 
CWA and brushing the southern portions of Commonwealth with some low 
end rain chances. Most locations north of the Hal Rogers/KY-80 
corridor will likely stay dry. Expect Wednesday morning's lows to 
range from the upper 30s in the valleys to mid 40s over thermal belt 
ridges. A smattering of mid 30s are probable in the sheltered 
valleys north of the Mountain Parkway where cloud cover will be 
thinner. Highs on Wednesday should reach the lower to upper 60s, 
coolest in the Tennessee border counties (where cloud cover will 
be thickest and rain chances highest). 

Shortwave ridging briefly returns as that disturbance departs 
Wednesday evening and the more well-defined shortwave trough and 
surface low approach. Model guidance continues to struggle with the 
arrival of precipitation in eastern Kentucky as the surface low 
rides the wavering frontal boundary to our south. The GFS falls on 
the faster end of guidance with rainfall spreading across most of 
the forecast area by 12z Thursday whereas the slower end of guidance 
shows the showers moving in mainly after 18z Thursday. After morning 
lows in the mid 30s (cooler valleys) to mid 40s (warmer ridges), the 
precipitation arrival time should prove crucial for realized 
temperatures. A faster arrival would tend to tamp down high 
temperatures while a slower onset would allow for more diurnal 
heating. The NBM maximum temperatures of 63 to 70 were retained and 
would be realized with a slower rainfall onset time (which is 
favored). Rainfall will likely continue through Thursday night. A 
rumble of thunder cannot be ruled out with this system but left out 
mention in the forecast and HWO for now due to uncertainty with 
timing and very limited instability. Showers should diminish from 
west-to-east on Friday as low pressure departs. Once again, high 
temperatures are forecast to reach the mid to upper 60s on Friday. 

Energy sheared off of the deep upper low near/over the Alaska 
Peninsula will cross the far northern Canadian Rockies on Wednesday 
and then drop across the Plains while forming a generally deepening 
closed low dropping into the Central CONUS and then passing over the 
Mississippi Valley late Saturday or early Sunday. Model agreement on 
this low's track, intensity, and potential interactions with another 
deep trough over Nunavut is still quite poor. As such, the specific 
details as to the timing of precipitation and the passage of an 
associated cold front are not yet ascertainable. With that said, 
there is potential for another widespread wetting rainfall and 
period of gusty gradient winds all followed by sharply cooler 
temperatures for the first days of May. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 12Z TAFS through 12Z Tuesday morning)
ISSUED AT 710 AM EDT MON APR 24 2023

Besides some IFR or lower fog seen along the deeper river valleys
through 13z, VFR conditions will prevail through the period. Few 
to scattered stratocu ranging from 5-7K feet agl will develop this
afternoon, with the better coverage expected towards I-64. These 
clouds will clear out towards dusk. Some mid and high level clouds
will move in from the west and southwest towards the end of the 
period. Light and variable winds will become northwesterly at 5 to
8 kts during the afternoon, before diminishing by early this 
evening. 

&&

.JKL WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Frost Advisory from 2 AM to 9 AM EDT Tuesday for KYZ044-050>052-
058>060-068-069-079-080-083>085.

Freeze Watch from late tonight through Tuesday morning for 
KYZ086>088-104-106>120.

&&

$$

UPDATE...JMW
SHORT TERM...GEOGERIAN 
LONG TERM...GEERTSON 
AVIATION...GEOGERIAN
