FXUS62 KGSP 241458
AFDGSP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Greenville-Spartanburg SC
1058 AM EDT Mon Apr 24 2023

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure remains in place through midweek. A pattern change 
arrives Wednesday as a series of upper waves cross the South, 
bringing rain chances through Friday. A cold front late Saturday 
brings a chance of thunderstorms.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
As of 1040 AM EDT Monday: Mid cloud deck lingering across our
extreme southern tier, but overall, sunny skies expected today,
as cold front sags further south. Temps are basically on track,
with highs expected to be 5-8 deg below normal. Dewpts are expected
to mix out a tad, and critical RH for fire wx still looks good
(See Fire Wx Section below). Have upgraded the Freeze Watch to a
Freeze Warning for all the counties along the TN border and also
Macon and northern Jackson, where temps will dip near 30. The rest
of the NC mountains will have a Frost Advisory for min temps in
the 33-36 deg range. Patchy frost may also be possible out across
the I-40 corridor in the NC Foothills and NW Piedmont. But there
may be enough wind to preclude more widespread formation there.

Otherwise, today will be another pleasant day, as a surface high
translates across the upper Ohio Valley.  The continued strength
of winds looks to precipitate another round of lee troughing by
late morning...with the 925mb chart depicting a WSW wind that
should mix down during the afternoon hours as mostly sunny skies
promote a daytime mixed layer.  In light of the cold front(s) that
have graced us with their presence the last two days, afternoon
highs will only creep into the upper 60s outside the NC mountains,
some 6-8 degrees below normal.  After a long night of persistent
winds and the reinforcement of dry dewpoints by the ongoing FROPA,
much of the forecast area will likely see Min RHs in the mid-20s
during the afternoon.

Tonight, as high pressure slides into the Mid-Atlantic, winds
will veer to the NE, and most of the CAMs depict another round of
weak CAA.  Consequently, winds outside the Appalachians should once
again stay elevated overnight.  This will hamper frost formation
even as forecast lows fall 2-3 degrees compared to this morning's.
In the mountains, though, NE flow is likely to have a more difficult
time producing consistent channeled winds in many of the bigger
mountain valleys (not to mention it being colder), so here,
there's better confidence on frost formation.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
As of 310 AM Monday: The center of high pressure moves into the Mid-
Atlantic Tuesday and remains in place through the end of the period 
in a cold air damming pattern. A series of short waves will cross 
the area in the nearly zonal or low amplitude cyclonic flow around 
an upper low over the Great Lakes. Tuesday remains dry but with 
increasing clouds as moisture slowly increases. Highs will be 5 to 
10 degrees below normal. This and the slight increase in moisture 
should keep RH values near or just above 25%. That said, any delay 
in the increase in moisture could lead to another day of increased 
fire danger for NE GA. Deep moisture and isentropic lift move in 
Tuesday night and maximize during the day Wednesday. There will also 
be upper divergence as well. Despite this, QPF will be light as an in 
situ wedge sets up keeping the air mass stable and limiting the 
chance of convection. Precip chances taper off Wednesday night as 
the synoptic and isentropic lift weaken, but clouds remain. Lows 
remain nearly steady near to 5 degrees below normal. Highs Wednesday 
will be significantly cooler given the CAD, but not as cold as a 
full on classical CAD but still 15 to 20 degrees below normal.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 205 AM Monday: The first in a series of waves crosses the area 
Thursday night as an upper low over the southern Plains opens and 
moves east in the nearly zonal flow. Short wave ridge develops 
Friday between the departing wave and an upper low diving into the 
Midwest. A strong short wave rotating around the low crosses the 
area late Saturday night or early Sunday with deep cyclonic flow 
developing in the wake of the short wave. At the surface, precip 
returns across the area Thursday into Thursday night as deep moisture 
and forcing move in ahead of the surface low associated with the 
short wave. Some weak in situ damming may remain ahead of this low, 
but weak elevated instability develops as the associated frontal 
systems put a squeeze play on the damming. Therefore, isolated 
thunderstorms will be possible. There looks to be a break in the 
precip chances late Friday night into Saturday morning between 
systems. Precip chances return late Saturday into Sunday morning as 
the cold front associated with the next system crosses the area. 
Right now, instability looks limited given the timing of the front, 
but a few thunderstorms will be possible. Precip ends during the 
afternoon. Highs will be 5 to 10 degrees below normal Thursday and 
Friday, rising to near normal Saturday and dropping a few degrees 
Sunday. Lows remain nearly steady up to 5 degrees above normal 
through Saturday night, then fall behind the front Sunday night.

&&

.AVIATION /15Z MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
At KCLT and elsewhere: VFR continues for all terminals.  BKN/OVC
clouds around 10-12 kft for the Upstate sites as a weak cold
front sags south and east of the area this morning.  Light NW
winds at all terminals at this point as the front pushes east,
and perhaps even some NNE over the next few hours.  Today, clouds
gradually decrease and another round of lee troughing is expected
- resulting in a period of WSW winds advertised at the Upstate
sites and KCLT.  Winds then become increasingly NE Monday night as
high pressure migrates across the Upper Ohio Valley and into the
Mid-Atlantic...and the resulting stratification portends increasing
clouds in the last 6 hours of the new TAF period Tuesday morning.

Outlook: Dry high pressure promotes continued VFR conditions into
Tuesday afternoon. Moisture will begin to increase Tuesday night as
the high migrates east. Unsettled wx is expected mid to late week,
with a series of low pressure waves crossing the region.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
RHs across the region will fall into the mid-20s this afternoon,
with a few locations even seeing RHs in the upper teens.  Sunday was
breezy enough (and with only limited relief during the overnight
hours) that 1h fuel moisture has dropped considerably.  So, although
winds are marginal for fire danger, RH alone warrants issuance of
a Fire Danger Statement for all six NE GA counties...and caution
should be exercised when burning across the forecast area.

&&

.GSP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...Increased Fire Danger until 8 PM EDT this evening for GAZ010-
     017-018-026-028-029.
NC...Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 9 AM EDT Tuesday for NCZ033-
     048>052-058-059-062.
     Frost Advisory from 2 AM to 9 AM EDT Tuesday for NCZ053-
     063>065-501-503-505.
SC...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...RWH
NEAR TERM...ARK/MPR
SHORT TERM...RWH
LONG TERM...RWH
AVIATION...MPR
FIRE WEATHER...MPR
