FXUS61 KCTP 241446
AFDCTP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service State College PA
1046 AM EDT Mon Apr 24 2023

.SYNOPSIS...
An upper level trough will park over the Great Lakes and New
England into at least the middle of the week. This will keep it
mainly dry with temperatures well below normal through that 
time. A return to near normal temperatures is expected for the 
second half of the week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
...1045 AM UPDATE...
Going forecast in good shape. As expected, regional radar mosaic 
indicating sct-nmrs showers have broken out over the Allegheny 
Plateau in the chilly unstable air mass. Diurnal heating, 
combined with the passage of a shortwave, will result in
continued activity through this afternoon, with increasing
intensity across especially northern PA later today. Model 
capes of 100-200 J/kg suggest a tsra is even possible in a few 
parts of northern PA this afternoon. Elsewhere, model RH 
profiles indicate early sunshine will give way to a good deal of
cumulus across southern PA, with an afternoon shower possible 
north of the turnpike. Mixing down from 850mb today only yields 
max temps from the low and mid 40s over the NW Mtns, to the mid 
50s in the Susq Valley, close to 15 degrees below average for 
late April. 

The focus tonight will turn to frost and freeze headlines, as
skies clear in the wake of the departing shortwave. The weakest
gradient and most favorable conditions for radiational cooling
appear to be over southwest PA, where the GEFS 2m temp 
anomalies are greatest. Guidance supports min temps between 
25-30F over the Alleghenies and central mountains, where a 
Freeze Watch has been posted. A lingering breeze further east 
should keep most locations in the Susq Valley above freezing, 
but areas of frost appear likely with lows in the mid 30s. Upon 
collaboration with neighboring offices, have decided to hold off
collaborating a Frost Advisory across eastern PA until the day 
shift.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH THURSDAY/...
Central PA will remain under the influence of the upper low over
the eastern Grt Lks Tuesday, resulting in another chilly day.
However, progged heights rise a bit, so expect slightly warmer
and brighter conditions than today, with sparser coverage of 
diurnally-driven showers across the northern mountains. Model 
soundings show some very dry air above a weak inversion Tuesday 
afternoon, a signature that usually results in dewpoints falling
below NBM guidance. 

The bulk of short range guidance indicates a shortwave rounding
the base of the upper trough will pass over PA Tuesday night
into early Wednesday, accompanied by scattered showers. Thermal
profiles are marginally cold enough for snow over the N Mtns, 
where a light coating on the ridgetops is possible by early Wed
morning. 

The shortwave will likely have passed east of the area by Wed
afternoon. However, cold temps aloft could support additional 
diurnally-driven rain showers. GEFS 2m temp anomalies remain 
around 10 degrees below average Wed afternoon, translating to 
highs mostly in the 50s.

Several shortwaves embedded in cool cyclonic flow aloft will 
maintain rain chances throughout the second half of the week and
throughout the weekend. Recent global model runs continue to 
shift the upper level low farther to the north and west, 
allowing for more moisture to move into the area. The driest day
of the period looks to be Thursday as upper level heights rise 
slightly and weak surface high pressure attempts to build in.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As noted above, the driest day of the period looks to be 
Thursday as upper level heights rise slightly and weak surface 
high pressure attempts to build in. This does not last long 
though and the next disturbance moves into the region Thursday 
night into Friday. 

By the weekend, models begin to diverge in regard to the
placement of an amplified trough and the track of its associated
surface low. The ultimate track of these features will determine
how much rain actually falls towards the end of the period, but
regardless, rainfall is likely for much of the weekend.

Model and ensemble consensus continues to outline below average
temperatures across much of central PA throughout the extended
period as the upper level low pressure continues to move
eastward.

&&

.AVIATION /15Z MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Still low CIGS at BFD as of mid morning, while the convective
temperature has resulted CU already forming outside the office
here as of 9 AM.

Earlier discussion below.

At daybreak, considerable cloudiness persists across the
northern and western highlands with sunshine southeast of the
Allegheny Front. There were some borderline IFR/MVFR cigs 
across NW PA, including in the vicinity of BFD.

Cloud cover will increase areawide as the day progresses, 
although cigs should eventually become VFR areawide. Spotty rain
showers are possible over the higher terrain. A westerly breeze
will increase to ~10 kts, with gusts of 15-20 kts possible.

Cloud cover will decrease tonight, and winds will diminish.

Outlook...

Tue-Wed...Spotty light rain or wet snow showers with occasional
MVFR conds across the N/W. Generally VFR expected elsewhere.

Thu...Generally VFR.

Fri...Increasing clouds with rain possible late.

&&

.CTP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Freeze Watch from late tonight through Tuesday morning for 
PAZ004-010>012-017>019-024>027-033>035-041-045.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...DeVoir/Dangelo
NEAR TERM...DeVoir/Fitzgerald
SHORT TERM...Fitzgerald
LONG TERM...Martin/Bauco/NPB
AVIATION...Martin/Evanego
