FXUS63 KUNR 241637
AFDUNR

Area Forecast Discussion For Western SD and Northeastern WY
National Weather Service Rapid City SD
1037 AM MDT Mon Apr 24 2023

.DISCUSSION...(Today Through Sunday)
Issued at 311 AM MDT Mon Apr 24 2023

Weak upper ridging sits across the northern Great Plains, as the 
region is between the Great Lakes low and the approaching Pacific NW 
low. Southeast low level return flow is setting up across the CWA. 
Overnight light east/southeasterly winds will become breezy today, 
especially over the western SD plain. Gusts to 35 mph are possible. 
IR Sat shows mostly clear skies this morning across most of the CWA, 
but with the incoming system, mid/upper clouds are increasing from 
the west. Weak warm air advection will bring highs in the mid 50s to 
mid 60s this afternoon. The upper low will dive southeast tonight 
and cross the southern Plains Tuesday and Wednesday. The inverted 
trough is still expected to cross the CWA tomorrow, bringing very 
good chances of precip to northeast Wyoming through the Black Hills 
and southwest South Dakota. There is still some uncertainty on where 
the heaviest QPF will be and the interaction with the Black Hills. 
There is also still uncertainty as to QPF amounts and low level 
temps. Some areas may get over half an inch of QPF. A few outlier 
models show several inches of snow across the Black Hills, but even 
this is varying run-to-run within the same model. Overall consensus 
is 1-3 inches is possible. The higher amounts will likely be toward 
the southern Black Hills, where QPF will be higher, but temps may 
also be just enough warmer to hinder snow/increase snow melt. The 
heaviest precip will fall during the day Tuesday, with temps steady 
in the 40s/50s...and 30s over the Hills. Precip will end Tuesday 
night, then a fast moving wave crossing ND will bring a quick shot 
of rain showers to western SD. The next storm system is an Alberta 
Clipper, that quickly drops down through the northern Plains, 
bringing colder temperatures and windy conditions to the region. It 
will also bring chances for precip Thursday and Friday, which will 
be mostly rain over the SD/WY plains. Accumulating snow is possible 
over the Black Hills, but amounts are even more uncertain.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS Through 18Z Tuesday)
Issued At 1029 AM MDT Mon Apr 24 2023

VFR conditions will continue through this evening. Then, 
rain/snow showers will slowly push northeastward into the area 
overnight and on Tuesday. AREAS MVFR/LCL IFR conditions will 
develop after 06z tonight over northeastern Wyoming, the Black 
Hills and far southwestern South Dakota with rain showers and snow
showers.

&&

.UNR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...None.
WY...None.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...13
AVIATION...10
